Update to draft (#17)
ietf-wg-jose/draft-ietf-jose-hpke-encrypt: draft-ietf-jose-hpke-encrypt.md

The resulting JWE is filled as follows:

- JWE Protected Header:
  * MUST contain "enc" with value "dir"
  * MUST contain "alg" that is the used JOSE-HPKE algorithm.

>   * MUST contain the "apu", "apv" and "zip" header parameters, if present.

Reviewer: Mentions of "apu" and "apv" should be removed, given how broken those are.

- JWE Initialization Vector MUST be empty.

> - JWE Ciphertext MUST be the raw ct output from HPKE Seal operation.

Reviewer 2: The term "ct" is not defined.

Author: Fixed.

 - `×||y` is the concatenation of byte strings x and y.
 - len32(x) is number of bytes in x as four-byte big-endian integer.
 - enc is the value of "enc" header parameter in JOSE header. The integrity-protected 'enc' parameter provides protection against an
   attacker who manipulates the encryption algorithm in the 'enc' parameter.
 - apu is The value of "apu" header parameter if present in JOSE header, otherwise empty string.
 - apv is The value of "apv" header parameter if present in JOSE header, otherwise empty string.

>  TBD: Authenticated key agreement mechanisms, such as ECDH-SS or authenticated HPKE modes, mitigate the risk of misusing apu and apv by binding the derived key to the specific identities of the participants. This ensures that any alteration to apu or apv invalidates the derived key, preventing unintended use. However, in the base mode of HPKE, where no authentication is provided, the use of apu and apv does not offer any security guarantees and could be subject to misuse. Do we really need apu and apv in the Recipient Context and why is it not required for JWE Integrated Encryption ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

File issues in GitHub - not as text in the draft.

Author: Removed text.

 - `×||y` is the concatenation of byte strings x and y.
 - len32(x) is number of bytes in x as four-byte big-endian integer.
 - enc is the value of "enc" header parameter in JOSE header. The integrity-protected 'enc' parameter provides protection against an
   attacker who manipulates the encryption algorithm in the 'enc' parameter.
 - apu is The value of "apu" header parameter if present in JOSE header, otherwise empty string.

>  - apv is The value of "apv" header parameter if present in JOSE header, otherwise empty string. 

Reviewer: "apu" and "apv" should be removed as broken. And the recipient context structure above should be updated to something like:

`len32(enc)||enc`.

- kdf_id: Depends on the JOSE-HPKE algorithm used.
- aead_id: Depends on the JOSE-HPKE algorithm used.
- info: By default, an empty string. Application MAY specify some other value.

> TBD: The existing JWE specifications do not provide a mechanism to include application context as AAD. Addressing this limitation exclusively for HPKE, while not applying similar measures to other algorithms, introduces an asymmetry in how messages are bound to their origin. This inconsistency could create potential vulnerabilities by differing security assurances across cryptographic algorithms. Why is this required just for JWE HPKE ?

Reviewer: Issue #13 seems related to this.

Author: Yes, it makes sense to write a separate draft, and I can start drafting it. It would be great if you and Oliver could co-author it.

> TBD: The existing JWE specifications do not provide a mechanism to include application context as AAD. Addressing this limitation exclusively for HPKE, while not applying similar measures to other algorithms, introduces an asymmetry in how messages are bound to their origin. This inconsistency could create potential vulnerabilities by differing security assurances across cryptographic algorithms. Why is this required just for JWE HPKE ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

File issues in GitHub - not as text in the draft.

{: #ciphersuite-kty-crv title="JWK Types and Curves for JOSE-HPKE Ciphersuites"}

## Key Usage Guidelines for JOSE-HPKE

To ensure predictable key usage within JOSE-HPKE, the following restrictions and guidelines are introduced:

1. **New Key Use Values**
   The following values are registered in the "JSON Web Key Use" registry to explicitly identify the roles of keys in HPKE operations:
   - **HPKE-Sender:** A key intended for use in the sender role of HPKE operations, performing encryption and key encapsulation.

>    - **HPKE-Receiver:** A key intended for use in the receiver role of HPKE operations, performing decryption and key decapsulation.

Reviewer: JWK has this:

"Because a core goal of this specification is for the resulting representations to be compact, it is RECOMMENDED that the name be short -- not to exceed 8 characters without a compelling reason to do so."

Maybe "HPKEauth" for sender role (since it is used for authentication) and "HPKE" for receiver role?

Author: Updated to "HPKEauth" and "HPKErecv"

> ## Key Usage Guidelines for JOSE-HPKE
> 
> To ensure predictable key usage within JOSE-HPKE, the following restrictions and guidelines are introduced:
> 
> 1. **New Key Use Values**
>    The following values are registered in the "JSON Web Key Use" registry to explicitly identify the roles of keys in HPKE operations:
>    - **HPKEauth:** A key intended for use in the sender role of HPKE operations, performing encryption and key encapsulation.
>    - **HPKErecv:** A key intended for use in the receiver role of HPKE operations, performing decryption and key decapsulation.
> 
> These values allow implementations to explicitly track and enforce role-specific key usage in HPKE operations and prevent key reuse with other cryptographic algorithms.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The correct key use value for any encryption operation is "enc", which is already defined.

Author: The new key use values are introduced to address mandatory security requirements outlined in the Key Management Section. Enforcing these rules would not be feasible without defining these values.

Reviewer 3: lets make sure to mirror this in COSE, or leave it out.

Reviewer: Unfortunately, COSE does not currently have "use" (only the broken key_ops).

Might be worth adding "use" to COSE (like "typ" was recently added).

## HPKE authentication

Authenticated HPKE modes MUST NOT be used for Key Encryption, as the message is not authenticated. Any recipient could act as a man-in-the-middle (MitM) and modify the message.

## Key Management

A single key MUST NOT be used in both sender and recipient roles. Avoiding the use of the same key for both sender and recipient roles ensures clear cryptographic boundaries and minimizes unintended interactions.

> A single key MUST NOT be used with both JOSE-HPKE and other algorithms as this might enable cross-protocol attacks.

Reviewer: For implementations tracking key use (to enforce this and the previous requirement), I think it would be useful to register key uses for HPKE receiver and sender roles in the "JSON Web Key Use" registry.

Author: Agreed, added text, see https://github.com/ietf-wg-jose/draft-ietf-jose-hpke-encrypt/commit/d07b510a64e9ecd325f15858f838c24e073cafd8.

Reviewer 3: I would move this registration to separate PR, and include examples

## HPKE authentication

> Authenticated HPKE modes MUST NOT be used for Key Encryption, as the message is not authenticated. Any recipient could act as a man-in-the-middle (MitM) and modify the message.

Reviewer 3: This sentence should explain why authenticated kems are not suitable for encrypting content encryption keys... the current language is not great.

Author: Please review the below proposed text:
Authenticated HPKE modes MUST NOT be used for Key Encryption, as the message is not authenticated. Authenticated HPKE modes ensure the sender's identity by validating that the shared secret originates from the sender’s static public key. However, this authentication applies only to the key exchange process and does not extend to the message encrypted with the CEK. As a result, while recipients trust that the CEK originates from the authenticated sender, they cannot verify the integrity or authenticity of the encrypted message itself. For example, a malicious recipient, after decrypting the CEK, can decrypt the message, alter its content, and re-encrypt it using the same CEK. Since other recipients trust that the message is tied to the authenticated sender, they will process the tampered message without suspicion.

## Key Management

> A single key MUST NOT be used in both sender and recipient roles. Avoiding the use of the same key for both sender and recipient roles ensures clear cryptographic boundaries and minimizes unintended interactions.

Reviewer 3: Why? isn't it viable to encrypt messages to yourself?

Reviewer: "encrypt to yourself" is usually done using symmetric algorithms, and this is the only known way of doing it post-quantum.

However, the algorithms available for this in JOSE are not great. Only the AES-CBC-HMAC is suitable for Direct Encryption (it is non-trivial to use AES-GCM in Direct Encryption without NDA attack).

A single key MUST NOT be used with both JOSE-HPKE and other algorithms as this might enable cross-protocol attacks.

> The context binding performed by JOSE-HPKE and HPKE ensures that it is safe to use a single key with multiple JOSE-HPKE algorithms and for both Integrated Encryption and Key Encryption.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A single key MAY be used with both Integrated Encryption and Key Encryption.
```

This document adds entries to {{JOSE-IANA}}.

## Updates to "JSON Web Key Use" Registry

The "JSON Web Key Use" registry is updated as follows:

   o  Use Member Value: "HPKE-Sender"

>    o  Use Description: Key for HPKE sender role (encapsulation)

Reviewer: Maybe "Key for HPKE sender role (authentication)"

Author: Fixed.

> 
> The "JSON Web Key Use" registry is updated as follows:
> 
>    o  Use Member Value: "HPKEauth"
>    o  Use Description: Key for HPKE sender role (authentication)
>    o  Change Controller: IESG
>    o  Specification Document(s): This document
> 
>    o  Use Member Value: "HPKErecv"
>    o  Use Description: Key for HPKE receiver role (decapsulation)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The correct key use value for any encryption operation is "enc", which is already defined.

>    o  Use Description: Key for HPKE receiver role (decapsulation)

Reviewer: Maybe "Key for HPKE receiver role (encapsulation/decapsulation)"

Author: why would the receiver perform encapsulation ?

Reviewer: While this text is going to be removed from this PR...

The public part of receiver role key is used for encapsulation/encryption and the private part is used for decapsulation/decryption.

While the public part of sender role key is used to verify the (optional) message authentication, and private part is used to (optionally) authenticate the message.

> ## Updates to "JSON Web Key Use" Registry
> 
> The "JSON Web Key Use" registry is updated as follows:
> 
>    o  Use Member Value: "HPKEauth"
>    o  Use Description: Key for HPKE sender role (authentication)
>    o  Change Controller: IESG
>    o  Specification Document(s): This document
> 
>    o  Use Member Value: "HPKErecv"
>    o  Use Description: Key for HPKE receiver role (decapsulation)
>    o  Change Controller: IESG

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>    o  Specification Document(s): This document
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ```
